[docs] Asking to test serialization/deserialization for new C++ feature (#200994)
llvm/llvm-project: clang/docs/InternalsManual.rst

    //   since-cxx17-note@#cwg92-p {{use 'noexcept(false)' instead}}
    // cxx98-14-error@#cwg92-p {{target exception specification is not superset of source}}

> Testing Modules (Serialization/Deserialization) When implementing a new C++ syntax

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Testing modules (serialization  and deserialization) when implementing a new C++ syntax
```

Though these are different things.

For example, if we require all features to have AST dump tests, then it's easy to make that test also test re-serialization.

But testing modules is a very different beast. And it might make sense to target this at aspects of features that have an interaction.

For example, what sort of module test would we expect from the 'template for' feature? I don't think there is anything interesting there.

Author: The motivation case is https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/195350 . The #embed doesn't have an straight forward interaction, but we just forgot to test it and users meet the problem. The design of modules requires all (or almost) features need to be serialized and deserialized. Then the doc change is about that.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

When we implement a new C++ syntax, we need to make sure that it works correctly with modules.
This means that we need to test that the syntax can be serialized and deserialized (if needed)

> correctly when used in a module. Otherwise, we can't claim the new C++ syntax is supported.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When implementing C++ functionality, it must work correctly with modules before claiming the feature is fully supported.
This may require adding test coverage for serialization and deserialization of C++ modules using the feature.
```

Author: Done

To test a syntax that can be serialized, we can use the syntax in a module interface unit.

> (For ease of description, we use contracts as the example here)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To test serialization, the feature can be tested in a module interface unit.
(For ease of description, contracts are used as the example here.)
```

Author: Done

.. code-block:: c++

  export module m;
  void func(int x) pre(x > 0) {}
  void func(int x, int y) pre(x > 0) pre(x > 0) {}
  int func(int x, int y, int z) pre(x > 0) pre(y > 0) pre(z > 0) post(r: r > 0) { return 1; }

And to test a syntax can be deserialized, we can import the module and use the entity (if any)

> defined with the syntax in the module interface.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To test deserialization, the serialized module can be imported to validate the behavior of the feature in the module interface.
```

Author: Done

.. code-block:: c++

  import m;
  int test() {
    func(1);
    func(1, 2);
    int x = func(1, 2, 3);
    return x;
  }

These tests should be put into ``clang/test/Modules`` directory. We can use ``split-file`` tool

> to put multiple files into a single test file. To serialize a module interface unit to a BMI (built

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These tests should be put into ``clang/test/Modules`` directory. The ``split-file`` tool
can be used to split a single test file into multiple logical files To serialize a module interface unit to a BMI (built
```
Is BMI "built module interface"? I thought it was "binary module interface?"

Author: Done

module interface), we can use the ``-emit-reduced-module-interface`` option. To deserialize the

> corresponding module interface unit, we can use ``-fmodule-file=<module-name>=<bmi-file-path>`` option.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
module interface), we the ``-emit-reduced-module-interface`` option can be used. To deserialize the
corresponding module interface unit, the ``-fmodule-file=<module-name>=<bmi-file-path>`` option can be used.
```

Author: Done

Put the above things together, we have

.. code-block:: c++

  // RUN: rm -rf %t
  // RUN: mkdir -p %t
  // RUN: split-file %s %t

>   //

Reviewer: It would be great if we could provide a simpler tool, or some sort of lit integration, to remove this boilerplate from every such test.

Author: Yeah it may be better but I feel it is not so bad. And also it seems not need to be in this PR.

  // RUN: %clang_cc1 -std=c++26 %t/m.cppm -emit-reduced-module-interface -o %t/m.pcm
  // RUN: %clang_cc1 -std=c++26 %t/use.cc -fmodule-file=m=%t/m.pcm -verify -syntax-only

  //--- m.cppm
  export module m;
  void func(int x) pre(x > 0) {}
  void func(int x, int y) pre(x > 0) pre(x > 0) {} // test we can serialize multiple pre conditions.
  int func(int x, int y, int z) pre(x > 0) pre(y > 0) pre(z > 0) post(r: r > 0) { return 1; }

  //--- use.cc
  // expected-no-diagnostics
  import m;
  int test() {
    func(1);
    func(1, 2);
    int x = func(1, 2, 3);
    return x;
  }

> We don't have to test all possible syntax combinations, which would be impractical.

Reviewer 2: I think I know what you're going for here but I'm struggling to find a more clear way to express it. Basically, if the data being serialized lives in a base class AST node, you don't need to test the [de]serialization behavior of every derived class, just the base class is fine. But with the example you have here, I think we would want there to be a test for a member function because a contract on a free function has different requirements than a contract on a member function (in terms of accessing things like `this`, function qualifiers, etc).

Author: What I want to say is, we should test the AST Nodes the new feature belongs to can be serialized and deserialized correctly. For the contract example (this may not be a good example as it is not implemented yet), in my mind, in AST nodes, we may only touch FunctionDecl instead of CXXMethodDecl. The requirements you mentioned will be implemented as checks in Sema. They may not be remained into the the AST Nodes. So I feel we don't need to test that.

Reviewer 2: How about something along the lines of:

The tests for serialization and deserialization are expected to ensure that the data contained by the AST node is properly saved and reconstituted. There is no need to add a serialization `RUN` line to every test, only a need to validate the internal state of the AST node can be round-tripped through serialization.

Author: “There is no need to add a serialization RUN line to every test” This sounds odd and confusing. I can't figure out its meaning as a dev reader.

Author: hmmm Maybe it is fine to say we won't test all combinations. WDYT? I feel this is natural?

Reviewer 2: > “There is no need to add a serialization RUN line to every test” This sounds odd and confusing. I can't figure out its meaning as a dev reader.

Fair! I was mostly trying to convey that the goal isn't to reproduce every semantic test with an additional serialization test.

> hmmm Maybe it is fine to say we won't test all combinations. WDYT? I feel this is natural?

Yeah, I could go with that combined with part of what I was suggesting. How about:

The tests for serialization and deserialization are expected to ensure that the data contained by the AST node is properly saved and reconstituted. Serialization tests do not need to exhaustively test all possible ways the AST node can be used in source, they only need to validate that the internal state of the AST node can be round-tripped through serialization.

Author: Yeah, agreed. Done.
